Palestinian Authority president Mahmud
Abbas is due to travel to Qatar in the
coming hours Abbas is going to meet the
Amir Sheik Tam bin hammad Alani in Doha
he's expected to discuss the role of the
Palestinian Authority in gaza's future
we're going to bring in M Rabani he's
the co-editor of Jalia it's an online
news source focused on the Arab world
very good to have you with us so let's
talk about this visit by the Palestinian
Authority president what role if any do
you think that the Palestinian Authority
could play in the future of Gaza well I
think um Palestinian president Mahmud
Abbas has been engaged in a life and
death struggle with relevance um since
the 7th of October um on the one
hand uh the the west and particularly
the United States are proposing that the
Palestinian Authority play a role in
postwar Gaza on the other they recognize
that this is out of the question unless
um this unless the authority is
rejuvenated and in that context there's
been growing talk of replacing him um
with uh with someone who might be more
effective but I think the broader
background here is that this is really
all based on an illusion because the
Palestinian Authority in its current
form lacks legitimacy lacks
Effectiveness lacks credibility it's
been very substantially weakened by
Israel with Western support I should add
over the years um and so I I think um
given katar's role uh along with Egypt
as a key mediators I think Abbas is very
much trying to ensure that the
Palestinian Authority maintains a foot
in the door I think it's also
unfortunate that it's only this issue
that is bringing him onto the stage um
you know his people have been subject to
a genocidal Israeli assault for months
now and the only issue that seems to
excite him is the future of the
Palestinian Authority and his personal
position um in the political Arena you
mentioned before that there had been uh
statements from Israel that the the
existing Palestinian Authority would not
be acceptable but a rejuvenated one a
changed one uh might be at some point it
was all very vague but time is against
that isn't it I mean in terms of the the
timeline we're talking about Israel is
is saying is preparing its people for a
long campaign at the same time it was
being reported that Benjamin net who
saying was saying that this latest
possibly last stage in the conflict this
offensive towards Rafa had to be done
before Ramadan which is round about
March the 10th and that brings that time
timeline much U much closer so one would
imagine it's going to be very difficult
for the Palestinian Authority as you
from what you were saying to have any re
relevance or even if it attempts to tr
try to change in a very short time span
yes well I think Israel's plans for the
pales in authority and for that matter
those of the um the US would make it
even less relevant I think the only um
uh realistic Prospect in this context
would be for the Palestinian Authority
for the fat movement which for decades
formed the spinal cord of the
Palestinian national movement um to
achieve a consensus with Hamas with the
other Palestinian factions and to
establish what is a genuinely National
rather than a factional Authority
because also I mean any alternative will
require the total eradication of Hamas
for it to succeed and Israel has already
demonstrated that you know while it
might be good at genocide and mass
killings it's just not up to the task of
militarily defeating Hamas and if that
restructuring goes ahead in some form
and it does have the PA does have some
sort of role in the future of Gaza one
would imagine there's going to be a
KnockOn effect for the West Bank as well
where in many cases it had its most
severe critics from Palestinians there
who as you've been describing have been
claiming that it has simply been an to
some extent an arm of the Israeli
security forces and has been unable to
protect them yes and I think that's part
of the problem of the Palestinian
Authority that has been having
increasing challenges imposing its
Authority on the West Bank which in in a
sense is its home base very much
challenged by Israel of course so if it
can't do that in the West Bank how does
it expect to do that in the Gaza Strip
and yes you know there is opposition to
Hamas and and criticism of Hamas in the
Gaza Strip of course there is but the
problem for Abbas is that doesn't
translate into support for the
Palestinian Authority it's not a zero
sum game we heard from our correspondent
hanim Mahmud describing the conditions
in Rafa there and more broadly the
conditions that Gaza has been reduced to
over the last several weeks there is
this question about the the potential
Israeli military operation in Rafa and
the key question is where are people
going to go and there is a certain
amount of speculation isn't there that
they might go over the border into Egypt
but as I understand it the Egyptian
authorities are absolutely dead set
against that because the last thing they
want is a large number of Palestinian
people coming into the Sinai that they
then have to deal with and that then
puts them under a direct kind of path
towards at least a breakdown in
agreement shall we say between Israel
between Egypt and Israel that exist at
the moment yes um Egypt is dead set
against the mass expulsion uh the forc
transfer of Palestinians from the Gaza
Strip into uh the Sinai desert I think
what Israel is now doing of course it's
escalating its attacks on ra I think in
part it's a pressure tactic to improve
their bargaining position with respect
to a potential um new truce and uh
prisoner exchange I think it's also
intended to pressure Reg and I think in
the back of their heads many Israeli
leaders are hoping well if we make
enough threats then it doesn't really
matter what Egypt says maybe these
Palestinians will just force um open the
border and start leaving Mo Rob we
appreciate you being with us thank you
very much indeed for your time thank you
you